hello my name is Dave Emery and it's my
pleasure and privilege to present to you
Christopher Simpson the author of among
other titles the science of coercion
published in hardcover and softcover by
the oxford university press copyright
1994 chris welcome to our airwaves
thanks Dave let me begin first of all by
thanking you for your work not only the
science of coercion that we're about to
discuss but also your landmark work
blowback and the splendid blonde beast
both of which I've read in my audience
is familiar with and I think shall we
say history or society owe you more than
they're likely to be able to repay I
think that's a little bit overstated I
think that I've been repaid pretty well
you know your audience might be
interested in another book this is not a
book that one would buy in a bookstore
but it is available in libraries and
that sort of thing it's a collection of
declassified national security council
records from the Reagan and Bush
administration and it it gives a pretty
good overview of what contemporary US
security policy is in the words of of
the National Security Council and the
President themselves all the time of the
book again it's a ponderous title
national security directives of the
Reagan and Bush administration I believe
I've heard of that
I believe I've heard of it in any event
it's a reference book a you want it's
not something about buying a bookstore
but ask for it at a library uh certainly
there's an awful lot to be researched
yet about those years and in fact I
think that that research will hopefully
take up an awful lot of literary space
and time
speaking of both we we have to move
along here and let's get to the subject
of your remarkable book the science of
coercion in this work you collate two
basic concepts or elements of
contemporary American society
psychological warfare and mass
communication research Chris why don't
we start by providing a working
definition of each
psychological warfare was it first
entered the English language as a
translation in a mutation of a Nazi
German concept called Welton Zhang's
Creek which means world view warfare and
the during world war two the Americans
built on that and expanded it and so
forth and used it to mean a whole range
of tactics wartime type tactics
involving propaganda dirty tricks covert
operations whatever it - to carry out
the war where it emerges into our modern
reality came in the wake of the war when
a more so-called peacetime type versions
of essentially the same tactics emerged
for years now of course the government
has told us that we're living in the
world of of no war no peace and what
that has meant as a practical matter is
that we're living in a world of ongoing
low-level warfare and one of the one of
the early terms that was used to
describe this is psychological warfare
nowadays they call it so-called low
intensity warfare sometimes it's called
in a more polite form public diplomacy
and so on just to just to build on that
point for a minute you know when you
hear people talking about low intensity
warfare it simply means low intensity
compared to nuclear weapons low
intensity warfare from the standpoint of
people who are subjected to it is quite
high intensity thank you very much
some people um would refer to it as as
total warfare conducted at the
grassroots level it's basically a form
of terror against Union organize I'm
talking about Central America now
union organizers church people community
activists of whatever sort and in
Central America alone you're talking
about fatalities measured in the
hundreds of thousands
all right communication research is the
the sort of ivory tower version of much
the same sort of thing there are schools
of communication research at at most
major universities in the United States
sometimes it's folded into the psychotic
use me the sociology department but in
any case it is say a box of
preconceptions and of tools
preconceptions about what communication
is and of tools for studying
communication and these preconceptions
and tools are are used to train
journalists public relations specialists
television and radio personalities all
sorts of people in college professors
I'm talking about myself now all sorts
of people who might be called
ideological workers in u.s. society
people whose day-to-day profession it is
to shape other people's ideology and
ideas communication researches is very
much tied up with that because it is a
in part it provides methods for
measuring how successful this kind of
ideological these types of ideological
campaigns have been we should make the
point that psychological warfare does
not in any way preclude the use of
deadly force that the type of warfare
that is called psychological warfare is
warfare that is generated for the
specific purpose of producing its
primary reaction a psychological field
this does not necessarily however
ah imply but no blood is shed and oh by
no means and in fact from from its
inception and from the its earliest
definition in classified government
records psychological warfare is defined
to include assassinations covert
operations guerrilla warfare
counterinsurgency and so forth and so on
the the from its inception psychological
warfare has been me the mating of
violence on the one hand and what people
would call today propaganda or
communication mass communication on the
other hand another thing that's
interesting about psychological warfare
from its inception it has also targeted
the people of the United States
the common preconception is as well you
know for better or worse this is
something that we do to them or words to
that effect but the the reality is is
from the government standpoint from the
standpoint of those who were paying the
bills for its development the targets
always involved not only foreign
audiences but domestic audiences as well
one of the points that we should perhaps
make just in passing is that a given
that the illusion that psychological
warfare does not necessarily produce a
bloodshed or is not necessarily very
bloody appears to have contributed to
one of the rationalizations that some of
the people who bridge the gap between
psychological warfare and mass
communication research and use they
rationalize their utilization of
psychological warfare by saying that
this would lead to a reduction of
bloodshed or less violent methods of
coercion sure sure and and there are
circumstances in which that is true and
for example if you have a if you have a
group of a battalion of surrounded
troops and and you can use old leaflets
and loudspeakers
to convince them that they're better off
surrendering than fighting to the death
then in that type of circumstance
psychological warfare can in fact reduce
bloodshed but that's a very limited part
of how this these techniques are
actually used the main way the main
application both measured in terms of
how often and how much money is spent on
it how much academic attention is given
to it the main use of psychological
warfare has been the suppression of
rebellious pro-democratic movements in
countries that the United States
government felt that it wanted to to
dominate most generally because of the
the natural resources of the country
sometimes because of the the
geostrategic position of the country
that's what psychological warfare has
have has actually been used for and
sometimes that's meant beating up union
organizers sometimes it's meant death
squads sometimes it's meant a systematic
a training of police organizations and
and of course as time has passed I mean
you know it's been more than 50 years
since 1945 now and and Zizi the science
if you will has not stood still in that
time as this has become more and more
sophisticated new techniques have
emerged to both intensify the violence
and to divorce or to separate the
sponsoring country or organization from
responsibility for the violence this was
one of the big lessons of Vietnam from
the standpoint of American security
planners is that is that you
you kept American troops out of the line
of fire to the maximum degree possible
it's because there was a political price
to pay if if too many kids came home in
body bags so what do you do well you you
send down the Green Berets to train and
equip the the Salvadoran police force or
their their Treasury police which then
becomes an organized form of death squad
too to carry out a a quite bloody civil
war in in El Salvador that lasted for a
decade during the 1980s and and El
Salvador's is as horrifying as that war
was it's just one name on the list there
are many other examples like that that
have have unfolded over the last 20 or
30 years Oh in your discussion of
psychological warfare Chris you talk
about white propaganda black propaganda
and grey propaganda do you think it
would perhaps be appropriate to discuss
the role of some of these personages and
institutions that are involved on the
one hand with psychological warfare and
on the other hand with mass
communication research as perhaps so a
form of grey propaganda sure sure
well part of what the book argues is
that this area of academic study and the
various schools that are connected to it
and the body of knowledge that is
connected to it and most importantly the
preconceptions that are connected to it
I'm talking about communication research
now that the the preconceptions that are
are tied up with communication research
emerged in very important part due to
government psychological warfare funding
at the height of the Cold War Chris
could I ask you well briefly to jump in
with a definition of great propaganda
for okay
okay well great properly to understand
great propaganda you got to address
white and black propaganda white
propaganda is like The Voice of America
for example why propaganda is Ollo
depending upon one's point of view is
like NBC News it is information that is
repeated constantly that has the
appearance of veracity objectivity
naturalness and so on but which in fact
has a distinct ideological subtext as a
distinct set of preconceptions about the
message that one is trying to put across
black propaganda on the other hand is
what most people would call covert
operations assassinations insurgencies
counterinsurgencies dirty tricks of a
variety of sorts sabotage the the Contra
affair in the Nicaragua and and then
building on that the whole iran-contra
business and then building on that the
whole business of the Contras in Iran
and the drugs those would be examples of
black propaganda grey propaganda to get
to your question exists somewhere
between the two and it has
characteristics of both the most common
type of grey propaganda is where a the
organization that's sponsoring it puts
disinformation misinformation into the
news media that a news media that has
the appearance of being independent from
that sponsoring organization a you know
rather simple example this would come
from say if the CIA puts a well here
I'll give you an example I saw myself is
uh is back when Libya
was America's worst enemy apparently
they've come down on the list of our
worst enemies so in recent years but
back when when Qaddafi was supposedly
the most dangerous man in the world the
CIA had a psychological warfare campaign
to paint him as sexually impotent as
somebody who was had a variety of sexual
fetishes and so forth and so on
well they planted this information as
though it were truth in European
newspapers and there that's gray
propaganda right the next step is is
that that then that type of thing blows
back into into the United States and
Americans conceptions of what's going on
I remember quite vividly the a cover
story in one of these supermarket
tabloids that that presented exactly
this story about Qaddafi at at the time
the Qaddafi was supposedly our big enemy
like many psychological operations this
this eventually blew up in the face of
the people who were sponsoring it and
was it was exposed as having been a
misinformation campaign so that so that
you know if you're if you're sharp
enough and if you care enough to watch
the little details of the comings and
goings of the CIA and people this type
then you can see perfectly well what's
going on but for most of us we don't
have time to do that you know we're
trying to raise families are trying to
try to try to you know go to work get
through the day and so on and so we get
this barrage of information fake
information usually from the media that
it takes on the appearance of being true
when in reality it is
manufactured if you will by people who
have a story to to promote and by and
large the the manufacturing is done by
people who have the money to pay public
relations firms and so forth and so on
to put this story out those of us who
don't have the money to to you know hire
our own public relations agent and so on
have a little bit more difficult time
getting access to the media now your
program David I know gets out pretty
well but you know fair is fair I mean
the truth is that not too many people
certainly
you know Dave Amer Embry compared to dam
rather it's a Dan it's got a bigger
audience I mean you know we just have to
deal with that reality oh it certainly
is
one of my favorite expressions is an old
Turkish proverb that he who tells the
truth gets chased out of nine villages
uh-huh very interesting uh Chris you
talk about the interrelationship between
psychological warfare and mass
communication research as involving
three major types of intersections one
you discuss Prague you discuss
psychological warfare or US
psychological warfare as in many ways
applied communication research by the
same token much of the funding for mass
communication research has come from
national security-related institutions
and that this in turn has had much to do
with shaping the post-world War two
nature of mass communication research as
an academic discipline and you trace the
genesis of this relationship to a number
of different institutions which were
centers of psychological warfare during
the Second World War I'd like to briefly
read a quote from page 25 of the science
of coercion and ask you to develop this
further on page 25 you write virtually
all of the scientific community that was
to emerge during the 1950's as leaders
in the field of masks
education research spent the war years
performing applied Studies on us and
foreign propaganda Allied trooper Alex
and internationally clandestine OSS
operations or the then emerging
technique of deriving useful
intelligence from analysis of newspapers
magazines radio broadcasts and postal
censorship intercepts this of Oldboy
Network had much to do with shaping the
immediate post-world War two academic
discipline of mass communication
research as well as psychological
warfare sure sure
yeah well I think you covered those
bases pretty well and one of the things
that that came out of that type of World
War 2 era cooperation a world war 2 is
it was a particular type of war I mean
you know Studs Terkel wrote a book
called the good war and I'm not sure
that any war can be described as good
but at the point that he was trying to
make is that it was a time in which the
country was unambiguously united for the
purpose of defeating a clearly evil
power and that that really has not been
the case certainly it's been a far more
complicated situation since that since
1945 anyway coming is so during the war
you have these these networks of
psychological operations specialists are
created moving into the Cold War period
the network's persist and for example
people who were quite influential during
the wartime period then some of them
move on to be the the directors and and
the senior scientists at the main
foundations like the Ford Foundation and
the Rockefeller Brothers fund the Social
Science Research Council and so forth
which is a major source of money for
four or so sociological research on the
other hand
some of the others went into into
publishing broadcasting and so on and
here's here's a quote from Edward
Barrett Edward Barrett ended up as as a
Dean of the school graduate school of
journalism at Columbia University and
founder of the Columbia Journalism
Review and so forth here's Barrett
talking about where his his colleagues
from the office of warrant information
ended up as of 1953 he's talking now
he says they include the publishers of
time book fortune in several dailies
daily newspapers he means editors of
magazines such as Holliday coronet
parade and Saturday Review I don't know
how many of your listeners are going to
remember coronet but but once upon time
that was a quite an influential magazine
editors of the Denver Post in New
Orleans times-picayune and others heads
of Viking press Harper & Brothers Farrar
Straus and young to Hollywood Oscar
winners a two-time Pulitzer Prize winner
the board chairman of CBS and a dozen
key network executives President
Eisenhower's chief speechwriter the
editor of Reader's Digest International
Edition at least six partners of large
advertising agencies the the the point
being here that not that all these
people thought alike and not that they
that they were engaged in some big
conspiracy or something like that but
rather that they had a common wartime
experience in a series of common
preconceptions about what communication
is and how it was supposed to be used
and how it could be studied and so on
that has had enormous impact on what we
today take to be communication now this
word communication is is a it's it's
trickier or it's more it's it's richer
in meaning
then it seems at first you know the the
root word comes from Latin calm and
muniya which means sharing of burdens it
the the spirit there is in a two way
exchange of information a two way
sharing of burdens now of course that
doesn't mean the burdens in Roman times
were necessarily equally shared but
nonetheless that this this basic
characteristic of communication is being
as having a two-way character or a
multi-way character remains true and you
see it in other words that are related
to it like commune or communion and so
on but nowadays communication
particularly it's taught in schools but
also the way it's used in commercial
enterprises has quite a different
meaning it means how I can tell you what
to do Chris I'd like to read very
briefly a quote from page 62 of the
signs of coercion which I think
addresses the point that you're
developing you write on page 62 as will
become apparent the dominant paradigm
unquote of the period proved to be in
substantial part a paradigm of dominance
in which the appropriateness and
inevitability of elite control of
communication was taken as a given as a
practical matter the key academic
journals of the day demonstrated only a
secondary interest in what communication
is quote unquote
instead they concentrated on how modern
technology could be used by elites to
manage social change extract political
concessions or when purchasing decisions
from targeted audiences I think that
that's a very different type of
communication than the route definition
that you've been giving us sure sure
that's right that's right in and and I
think now getting back to like one of
the the themes that we started with is
that has to do with this inter
interlocking relationship between that
type of communication that you've just
described in violence and our
they are they really link together or is
this just just something that that that
I'm asserting let me communiques and
linked together by the way Chris we've
got about two minutes left on this side
uh son because I'm at the side of a tape
right then we have another half-hour of
the interview just okay I'd say what to
what why don't you just go ahead and
turn over the tape and then and then
we'll get into okay sounds like a very
good idea we've been speaking with
Christopher Simpson the author of the
science of coercion published in soft
cover by the Oxford University Press
copyright 1994 subtitle by the way
communication research and psychological
warfare for Kris Simpson this is Dave
Emory sankt thanks for listening hello
my name is Dave Emory and once again
it's my privilege to present to you
Christopher Simpson the author of the
science of coercion subtitled
communication research and psychological
warfare 1945 to 1960 published in hard
and soft cover by the Oxford University
Press Chris welcome back to our airwaves
thanks I'm glad to be here we've been
discussing what literally could be
called a networking of social scientists
and national security institutions and
personages which had its development
with world war ii development during
world war ii and then evolved in the
post-world War two period to affect what
perhaps might be called a synthesis of
social science and national security
operations you discuss a an old boy
network stemming from World War two that
we touched on and are for in the first
half-hour of our interview and then you
trace the concretization to coin a term
all this relationship between a
psychological warfare and communication
research with the development of the
post-world War two national security
state through such NSC documents and our
NSC directives as NSC for for a and 10/2
could you briefly discuss those for us
sure sure NSC of course is the National
Security Council and they're the
principal advisors to the President on
national security issues that got set up
mainly because up until the end of the
Roosevelt administration you had the the
military advisors kind of shouting in
one corner and the political advisors
shouting in the other and in the
President Roosevelt was was crafty
enough to to handle both but but as a
new world emerged Truman and his
successors wanted the staff to to
combine the military and the political
questions into a single group of
advisors and back in the beginning one
of the very first things that that this
combined staff did was to work on the
the question or the issue of
psychological warfare in the in a
combination of propaganda on the one
hand and violence on the other hand in a
example of this is NFC which means
simply National Security Council
document number four and what it said
was that now this was this is a rated
confidential in those of you who are who
are sort of government National Security
buffs know that a confidential document
is the lowest level of government secret
and and tens of thousands of government
employees have access to it and so while
it is nominally officially and even
legally a secret quote-unquote as a
practical matter confidential
information is seen on the front page of
newspapers virtually every day and then
that has been the case for decades so
NFC four was a confidential decision
that said well we have to set up
psychological warfare operations to
counter the Russians and this will
consist of what was the predecessor of
the of the u.s. Information Agency and
the voice of the early voice of America
and so on
so psychological warfare in this
officially secret but really public
definition was the hard-hitting
propaganda was was the way it was
presented in any see you saw it written
up in those terms in US News and
Report and magazines of that sort well
minutes after deciding on NFC for as a
confidential decision the National
Security Council took up NSC 4a which
was a top-secret decision in a top
secret classification is considerably
stricter than confidential in one of the
one of the its its aspects is is that
the very existence of a top-secret
decision is secret so that no government
official can legally acknowledge that as
a top secret decision to do this thing
or that thing has been made well NSC for
a said that this that these little
propaganda operations USIA the voice of
America and so forth would be
supplemented by systematic campaign of
sabotage guerrilla warfare covert
operations assassination insurgency
counterinsurgency and so forth and that
the the authority to to do this at the
stage of NSC for a was was pretty vague
it's because of the different security
agencies was we're still arguing over
who would get the get the brief to to
carry out this type of warfare in the
decision on that came about six months
later with a disc with a decision it was
called NFC 10/2 and again you're you're
you're CIA buffs are probably pretty
familiar with 10/2 that was created and
entirely secret government agency its
name was the office for policy
coordination and the the function of
this entirely secret government agency
was specifically to carry out these
types of covert op
patience that I mentioned just a moment
ago that that is secret government
agency eventually became the the
so-called Operations Directorate of the
CIA which has basically the same
functions to this day one of the
institutions that you mention as
exemplifying this marriage of social
science and warfare insight and the
propaganda is public opinion quarterly a
very influential academic journal which
in many ways epitomizes this bridging of
that gap right yeah and I would like to
talk about public opinion quarterly but
it but to get at this whole question of
the of the interplay between academic
and the end violence I think it's
necessary to take a step even further
back than that and that is to look at
how mass consumer societies spread
themselves how they work now okay we
live in a mass consumer society today
and you know if the thing runs on how
many Ford's or Toyota's or cans of
coca-cola or whatever it is that the
various manufacturers can sell to their
to their audiences in most of the mass
media the real job that most of the mass
media is involved in is look is the
business of selling eyeballs to
advertisers and and it's all broken out
to rather precisely you know is if you
if you have if you want to buy
advertising on sign Seinfeld or just to
you know pick a show it doesn't matter
which one 60 minutes the the network can
tell you with great precision how many
million men between the ages of 16 and
25 watch this program how many million
women between the ages of 25 and 35
watch this program and so forth and so
on and so you can see
if you watch if you watch particularly
which the the sitcoms you can see
precisely in the advertising precisely
who it's aimed at so that what a TV
station really does is not put on
entertainment where its money comes from
is in selling your eyeballs to
advertisers in order to do that in order
to make that work there has to be ways
to count how many eyeballs are being
sold there has to be way there have to
be ways to to survey this into to to put
forward a plausible argument from the
media side to the advertisers as to why
the advertisers should come up with a
billion dollars a year or whatever it is
to sell cosmetics for example or
comparable numbers to sell automobiles
and so on all right well where the
academic field of mass communication
research began was in the development of
these techniques to do precisely that
type of measurement to measure how many
eyeballs or how many ears in those years
because we're talking about radio when
the thing originated we're looking at
particular tais Minh sandals and to what
degree did the did the did the person
reading an advertisement remember that
advertisement and so forth and so on
and they you know there lots and lots of
studies that that you can find in in the
library that elaborate on these themes
now the get around to the to come around
to the question of violence what what
we've seen since the 1930s with the
expansion of this type of consumer
society and this is I'm not even talking
about it left or right or you know
whether one is capitalist or another
socialist or you know any
that stuff I'm talking about the
expansion of mass consumer society
around the world what one has seen is
that that's that type of society
precludes it overwhelms other forms of
social organization it cuts them out and
proceeds rather frequently with great
violence often including genocide
particularly genocide of indigenous
peoples as it spreads around the world
as it spreads it carries particular
ideas with it particularly conceptions
about what's a good and what's bad about
the world and how things work and so
forth now you know we can go on for
another hour about consumer societies
and so on but the point that I'm trying
to get around to here is number one for
consumer society to run there has to be
some way to measure what's being bought
and sold number two for it to expand it
can expands only at the expense of
existing societies and number three that
as it overwhelms an existing Society say
as it arrives in Turkey or Lebanon or
Egypt or in Southeast Asia or in Peru it
breaks down the existing social
structure and instead substitutes itself
and this sets off a chain of both
frequently damage to the people who live
there and also resistance to these
developments so how do you manage the
resistance to the arrival of coca-cola
and Ford Motor Company and so forth how
is when the local unions when the local
social activists when the local churches
decide they've had it about up to
year with what the with what the foreign
companies are trying to push onto them
how do you manage these people well then
that comes around to the question of
psychological warfare and the the whole
theory of how development quote-unquote
economic development comes about the
main centers of communication research
during the 1950s and 1960s were obsessed
with this question of well what do you
do with people in Egypt don't like the
products that you're trying to sell them
what if they're Restless how do you keep
them in line the first step of course is
is that you you know you broadcast radio
programs or television programs or
something that in in one way or another
either in nice words or in nasty words
we you guys better keep in line that's
the first step and then when that
doesn't work what's the next step well
you've got carrots and sticks so you
have some economic development and and
so on but there's also the stick and
what the stick is is police and military
violence particularly counterinsurgency
particularly so-called
low intensity warfare methods to
identify the dissidents in these various
societies and to eliminate them and and
by the 1990s this process of identifying
and quite literally eliminating people
who are seen as inconvenient to the
expansion of these particularly of
American interests around the world this
has become high science and and you see
it operating most particularly in
Central and South America today Oh Chris
jumping ahead to something that follows
fairly logically from above it is
that we've just been engaging in you
discuss and and you write on page 53 as
follows
at least a half dozen of the most
important centers of us communication
research depended for their survival on
funding from a handful of national
security agencies their reliance on
psychological warfare money was so
extensive as to suggest that the
crystallization of mass communications
studies into a distinct scholarly field
might not have come about during the
1950s without substantial military CIA
and US Information Agency intervention
one of the six institutions that you
talked about was the is the Center for
International Studies at MIT and in
connection with mass communication and
what it does to societies could I ask
you to talk about development theory
which is actually a term which it has a
mass communication research
applicability and also a national
security applicability development
theories is the it's an it's an
interdisciplinary theory you know this
is very this is very much the fond fond
dream of academics is to have these
interdisciplinary developments that
company combines communication research
sociology political science bits and
pieces of psychology and so on and the
if idea is to to figure out it is really
a quite an arrogant idea to figure out
some sort of formula by which every
country in the world would develop
quote-unquote along the lines that the
hegemonic power which in given that this
particular bit of research was was being
done in the United States involved the
United States along the lines at the
hegemonic power wanted it to develop now
you know there was a cold war going on
the Americans weren't the only players
in this game and what happened was is
that the
the various developing countries of the
world countries that had come out from
under colonial yoke and and so on we're
caught in this crossfire mainly between
the Russians and the Americans and to
their to their great disadvantage even
even Pope John Paul the second who is is
no radical by any stretch of the
imagination has argued that this is
so-called development in the midst of
the of the Cold War has in truth been
extraordinarily damaging to most of the
people in the world and most
particularly to the people in in those
countries that became centers of
contention between East and West
development theory was what the
so-called best and brightest of the West
attempted to work out as a sort of a
general strategy a general a unified
field theory so to speak of how these
types of crises were going to be managed
one of the institutions would serve to a
large extent as a vehicle for the
weighing and communication of some of
the concepts such as development theory
developed by the cen is is the
aforementioned public opinion quarterly
and that publication in many ways
epitomizes the crossover between
psychological warfare and communication
research can ask you to discuss the 1952
issue on international communication
research which could perhaps be
described as something of a covert
operation in and of itself sure sure
yes and and this gets back to a question
you raised earlier which I went drifting
off into another subject and didn't
really get around to answering your
question before public opinion quarterly
is is a very well-known academic journal
who that specializes in how public
opinion is measured and during the early
1950s it was really rather
straightforward in that it viewed it
as participating in psychological
warfare and it would publish articles
describing what the the various tactics
of the West had been against the Germans
during World War Two and and that sort
of thing that was on it on the first and
sort of most obvious level the next
level which is what I think you're
getting at Dave is that that journal
itself promoted particular attitudes
about what communication is what society
is and even down to such things as as
you know what's what's the correct line
on on a strategy for dealing with the
Russians or the Italians or you know you
name it right I mean some of the work
that Warren well to warn Walter for
example did in VO key right right so so
the the journal itself was was although
it didn't present itself in these terms
as a practical matter it was a
propaganda organ if you will and then on
the third level what one sees this is a
very close inbreeding between the the
senior editors and the Editorial Board
of the journal on the one hand and the
intelligence agencies on the other hand
the founder of the journal back in 1937
was a man by the name of DeWitt Poole
who was then on sabbatical from the
State Department and his specialty was
anti-communist propaganda I mean that's
that's what he did for a living and he
moving into the the post-war period he
eventually became a senior executive
with the with the Radio Free
europe/radio Liberty operations that
were that were funded by the CIA in that
in that particular issue of the journal
it's a quarterly journal so I mean you
know it came out four times a year but
the one that you're talking about
there were a series of interesting
reports including one that that
presented itself as though it was simply
communication research in the title I'm
paraphrasing the title now this is not
exactly it but the gist of it was a
extremists in Iran communication and
extremists in Iran and if you're sitting
there looking at the book Dave you might
be able to give me the the exact words
who were these extremists well what was
going on was that the voice of America
was paying a very well-known very
liberal think tank in New York called
the Bureau of applied Social Research to
study dissident groups in the Middle
East in this particular study that we're
discussing looked at so-called
extremists in Iran and who who those
people were were supporters of Mohammed
Mossadegh who was at the time the leader
of Iran but he was out of favor from the
from the West it's because he he had
this extraordinary idea shocking idea
that Iran should control its own oil
resources so now the this did not go
down very well with the Americans or
with the British him and eventually they
engineered a coup d'etat that overthrew
mosa death in his supposed extremist
followers and installed the Shah of Iran
so what you see in the academic journal
the the the sort of the mirror of this
as it appears in the academic literature
is a article that has it has lots of
footnotes and it has the vocabulary and
it has the you know the whole sort of
image of heavy academic research but
what it is in truth is a report on a
applied political covert operation that
where these guys went out and attempted
to get the lay of the land so that that
the coup d'etat to overthrow Mosaddegh
would go more smoothly by the way I have
the title of that article it's political
extremists in Iran a secondary analysis
of communications data and that was
altered by benjamin ringer and david
sills and as you point out it was simply
an adjunct to an ongoing our then
ongoing covert operation against
Mosaddegh in iran mm-hmm that's right
that's right and you see that same sort
of we've been talking about a
three-level pattern here where you where
you have articles that are officially
and literally about psychological
warfare psychological warfare report on
on how we how we convince the Japanese
on Saipan to surrender in World War two
okay an official psychological warfare
study then you have the next level of
propaganda to social scientists to
convince them to toe a particular line
and then you have this third level
worthy were the publication's of social
science themselves become tools for
intelligence gathering or as in as
illustrated in this particular case as
elements of covert operations you
discuss also the hook insurgency or in
the Philippines and similar articles
that functioned in connection with that
covert operation and some of these
operations were quite bloody Chris we're
down the last three minutes or so of our
interview and I'd like to read a
sentence from page 85 and ask you to
comment on the effects of some of these
relationships on the methodological
paradigms of communication research on
page 85 you write this continuity of
leading theoreticians became part of a
broader pattern through which
the psychological warfare unquote of one
generation became the quote
international communication unquote of
the next and you talk about one of the
effects of the overt of the relationship
between mass communication research and
psychological warfare a sort of an
internal purge of dissident voices so to
speak not by the government but by the
recipients of the government largesse or
positive feedback and then you discuss
the effects of this on the developing
zeitgeist or dominant paradigm of
communication research right right in
somebody who says professional radio
personality as you are Dave you might be
able to wrap that up in three minutes
but I play the truth I cannot do it in
three minutes
but but what I will say is this is that
you what one saw was is in the early
Cold War they talked about psychological
warfare straight up you know they were
pretty frank about the whole thing by
the mid 1950s they realized that if you
talk about oh well we're engaged in
psychological warfare against the
Italians that the Italians mean I like
that very much and they they may take
exception to it so the the the rhetoric
of the field began to change and there
was an example coming out of Columbia
University as I recall in which a long
Dibley ography of what psychological
warfare was examples of a definitions
case studies and so forth had been
prepared secretly during the early 50s
and then eventually published in 1955 or
1956 and the only difference between the
1953 version that was talking about
psychological operations in the 1956
version was that the title had been
changed and the new title was
international communication the rhetoric
of the field was changing but the
content of the field was was not
changing or at least the content of the
field was developing along the same
lines that it had developed earlier and
this is the way that
that the that the relatively
straightforward youth in discussion of
psychological warfare is a form of
violence and social control of the of
the immediate post 1945 period became
starting in the 60s and into the 70s and
up to the present day became
communication international
communication even sometimes conflict
resolution and portrayed in these much
more cushioned terms that tended to to
isolate the people who were using them
from the realities of the world that
they were in the process of creating
Chris we are at the end of our interview
do you think it would be unfair to
perhaps describe the situation that you
just India set forth for us as kinder
gentler psychological warfare uh well if
you if you take into account that George
Bush was uh was he was not telling the
truth when he said that he was a kind
ler kinder gentler Ronald Reagan that
that is uh I think that was your point
and yeah sure I'll go with that all
right we've been speaking with
Christopher Simpson the author of the
science of coercion subtitled
communication research in psychological
warfare 1945 to 1960 softcover and
hardcover editions oxford university
press copyright 1994 for Chris Simpson
this is dave emery saying thanks for
listening